In this activity, we will use
Spark to perform cluster analysis.
First, we will load
the minute weather data.
Next, we will remove the unused and
missing data and
then scale the data so
that the mean is zero.
We will then create an elbow plot,
a subset of the data,
to determine the optimal
number of clusters.
And then cluster the full
data set using k-means.
Finally, we will generate parallel plots
to analyze the individual clusters.
Let's begin.
First, let's open the clustering notebook.
Execute the first cell
to load the libraries.
Execute the second cell
to load the data set.
This data set contains weather station
measurements that were taken every minute.
So there's a lot of measurements.
We can count how many rows there are in
the data frame by running df.count.
This says that there are over 1.5
million rows in the data frame.
Clustering this much data on a single
Cloudera VM can take a lot of time.
So let's only work with
one-tenth of the data.
Let's subset the data
into the new data frame.
We'll enter filteredDF
= df.filter((df.rowID
% 10)) == 0.
We then count the rows of the new data
frame by calling filteredDF.count.
The new data frame has one-tenth as
many rows as the original data set.
Let's compute the summary
statistics using describe.
filteredDF.describe, and
to display it nicely,
we'll enter toPandas().transpose.
Run this.
These weather measurements were taken
during the period of a long drought.
As we can see from the mean values
of the two rain measurements,
rain accumulation, the rain duration,
the measurements are close to zero.
Let's count how many rain
values are equal to 0.
FilterDF.filter(filterDF.rain_accumulation
==
0.0).count().
Now let's do rain duration.
filteredDF.filter(filteredDF.rain_duration
==
0.0).count().
We can see from these counts that most
in these two measurements are zero.
So let's remove them from our data frame.
workingDF =
filterDF.drop('rain_accumulation').drop('-
rain_duration').
And we'll also drop the column
called hpwren_timestamp,
since we will not use it.
So .drop('hpwren_timestamp').
Next, let's drop rows with missing values,
and count how many rows were dropped.
before = workingDF.count() workingDF =
workingDF.na.drop() after
= workingDF.count(),
and finally, we'll print the difference,
before- after.
So only 46 rows had missing values and
were dropped.
Next, let's scale the data so that each
feature will have a value of 0 for
the mean and a value of 1 for
the standard deviation.
First, we need to combine the columns
into a single vector column.
We can look at the existing columns
by entering workingDF.columns.
We do not want to include rowID
since it is a row number.
Additionally, the minimum wind
measurements have a high correlation
to the average wind measurements,
so we will not include this either.
Let's create an array of
the columns we want to combine and
then use vector assembler to
create the vector column.
featuresUsed = [.
Now, let's copy and
paste the columns we want to use.
Assembler = VectorAssembler(inputCols
= featuresUsed,
outputCol = "features_unscaled").
And finally, assembled =
assembler.transform(workingDF).
Run this.
Now we'll use standard
scaler to scale the data.
Scaler = standard scaler
inputCol=”features _unscaler”,
outputCol=“features”, withStd = true,
withMean = True,
scalerModel = scaler.fit(assembled),
scaledData =
scalerModel.transform[assembled].
Next we will create an elbow plot
to determine the value k, for
the number of clusters.
To create the elbow plot,
we will calculate the within cluster,
sum of squared error, or WSSE,
for different values of k.
So since some valves running
K-means many times, let's do it for
a smaller subset of the data
since it'll be faster.
First, let's choose the data to work with.
Let's subset the data.
So scaledData =
scaledData.select("features"), ("rowID").
elbowset =
scaledData.filter((scaledData.rowID
%3) == 0).select("features").
And finally,
we'll call the persist method on elbowset.
Persist will keep it in memory,
and make the calculations faster.
Run this.
Now, let's compute the WSSE values for
different values of k.
We'll do for k, 2 to 30.
Clusters equals range(2,31).
wsseList = utils.elbow(elbowset,
clusters).
Run this, This will print out
the value of wsse for each value of k.
As you can tell, this'll take some
time to run, let's skip to the end.
Now let's display the plot of our data.
utils.elbow_plot(wsseList, clusters).
The x axis is k, the number of clusters,
and the y axis is the WSSE value.
You can see that the graph flattens
out between 10 and 15 for k.
So let's choose k equals 12 as
the midpoint for our number of clusters.
We'll now cluster the data into
12 clusters using k-means.
First, let's select the data
we want to cluster.
scaledDataFeat =
scaledData.select("features"),
scaledDataFeat.persist.
Now I'll perform
the clustering using kmeans.
kmeans = KMeans(k=12, seed=1).
model = KMeans.fit(scaledDataFeat),
and finally,
transformed =
model.transform(scaleDataFeat).
Run this.
We can now see the centre
measurement of each
cluster by calling model.clusterCenters.
It is difficult to compare the cluster
centers just by looking at these numbers.
So let's use parallel
plots to visualize them.
P = utils.pd_centers(featuresUsed,
model.clusterCenters).
Let's show the clusters for
dry days where the weather samples
have low relative humidity.
utils.parallel_plot(P[P['relative_humidi-
ty']
< -0.5], P).
The x axis of this chart shows
the different measurement types.
The y values show the standard deviations,
with zero being the mean.
Each line is a different cluster, and
there are five clusters in this graph.
We can see that they all have
a low relative humidity.
Notice that cluster four, the red one,
has a high average wind speed and
a high maximum wind speed.
Additionally, it has a low
average wind direction.
Which means it was coming from
the north and northeast directions.
So this cluster probably
represents Santa Ana conditions.
Next, let's show the plot for warm days,
the weather samples with
high air temperature.
utils.parallel_plot(P[P['air_temp'] >
0.5], P).
Other clusters in this plot have air
temperature greater than 0.5 standard
deviations away from the mean.
However, they have different values for
the other features.
Now let's show the clusters for cool days.
Weather samples with high relative
humidity and low air temperatures.
utils.parallel_plot(P[(P['relative_humidi-
ty']
> 0.5) & (P['air_temp']
< 0.5)], P).
All the clusters in this plot have
relative humidity greater than 0.5
standard deviations and air temp
less than 0.5 standard deviations.
These clusters represent cool
temperature with high humidity and
possibly rainy weather patterns.
So far we have seen all
the clusters except two.
Since it is not falling to any other
categories let's plot this cluster,
utils.parallel_plot(P.iloc[[2]],
P).
Cluster two captures
days with mild weather.